The Biden administration has relocated
the final group of Afghan evacuees
from a New Jersey military base.
The effort ends the first stage of a massive month
long resettlement operation following
the collapse of the, now, Taliban
controlled Afghan government.
76,000 Afghans have already relocated
to their new communities in the US.
According to information obtained by CBS News,
nearly half of the 67,000 Afghans,
processed at domestic bases, have settled in these states.
Another 21,000 have settled in 17 other states
and that number could grow.
Wyoming is the only state not expected
to receive any evacuees.
CBS News immigration reporter, Camilo Montoya Galvez,
is here with me now.
Hi, Camilo.
Officials say that this resettlement operation
is the largest in US history.
Is that correct?
Can you tell us how many have been resettled so far?
Where they're going?
And why is Wyoming not on that list?
This is certainly the largest evacuation and resettlement
operation by the US government since 1975,
When the US resettled tens of thousands
of Vietnamese refugees following the fall of Saigon.
So far, as you mentioned, 76,000 of these Afghan evacuees
have been resettled in over 200 communities across the US.
Many of them were processed at these military installations
where they underwent vaccination against the coronavirus
and other diseases, as well as immigration paperwork.
We know that half of the evacuees process
at these military installations have
resettled in eight states, including Texas and California.
Another dozen states have received each more than 1,000
evacuees.
And, as you mentioned, Wyoming is the only state
that we understand is not set to receive any evacuees.
Is that because state officials have said, we don't want any
evacuees?
Or why is that?
It's unclear, but there is not the same resettlement
infrastructure in that state compared to these larger
states.
We know you'll dig into that answer.
We know that top FEMA official, Bob Fenton,
has been leading these resettlement efforts.
You spoke with Fenton.
What did he tell you?
Bob Fenton, who is a DHS official overseeing
this effort, said that this is the largest
operation of its kind.
Again, these evacuees needed culturally appropriate food,
faith services, vaccination, medical services,
legal assistance to file applications for work permits
and asylum applications.
And so, he likened these military bases
to eight small cities.
Let's hear some of your interview with him.
I think this population is special.
These are individuals that work for the United States
and support our military . in war over the last decade.
There's a lot of unique stories.
I've had the opportunity to walk through the bases,
hear these stories.
I met a woman who's resettling to Minnesota that looks forward
to being a teacher there and giving back
to the United States.
Many of these people want to enter our communities.
They want to be accepted.
Just amazing to walk among the kids and see the smiles
and have led a very vulnerable life.
We, as Americans, need to help accept them
in, help them get situated, and welcome to the United States.
So Bob Fenton is very welcoming.
Do we know if the majority of Americans feel as welcoming?
Polling does seem to indicate, Tanya,
that a majority of Americans support helping and resettling
Afghans who directly assisted US military forces during the year
old war in Afghanistan.
And, to be frank, this is a rare immigration policy
that has garnered bipartisan support, including
from Republicans in Congress.
However, some conservative Republicans
have expressed concern about the way these evacuees were vetted
and screened, but the Biden administration
has maintained that all of these evacuees
went through rigorous vetting at overseas military installations
before reaching US soil.
We also know, according to a government report that we
obtained, that several evacuees were
barred from entering the US after red flags were
raised during processing.
And Camilo, you talked to Fenton about a variety of things,
including how these refugees are getting
acclimated to a new normal.
Let's listen to what he said.
One of the things we're focused on
was safety of, not only the Afghan population,
but communities in the United States.
To ensure that all the age appropriate vaccinations were
provided to our guests as they evacuated was important.
Plus, doing all the screening and vetting overseas and again
at our ports of entry to ensure of who we were letting
in the United States and that, from a security standpoint,
we were making good decisions in that respect.
Camilo, what other obstacles are both the government
and these Afghan refugees facing?
One major obstacle, Tanya, is that many of these evacuees
could find themselves in legal limbo.
For all intents and purposes, these evacuees
are refugees because they fled a war zone.
However, legally they are not refugees
because they do not enter through the traditional US
refugee program.
The Biden administration authorized their entry
through another classification, known as humanitarian parole.
Parole allows them to live and work here legally,
but it does not offer them a pathway
to permanent legal status.
So their paperwork is tricky, is what you're saying?
They're going to have to go through all
these legal hurdles?
Correct.
Unless Congress moves to legalize them,
as the Biden administration has proposed,
these evacuees will not have a permanent pathway
to US citizenship.
Will they not be able to work here, then?
They will be able to work here and live here
for up to two years and they can renew that classification,
called parole.
But again, they cannot have access to green cards right now
and, ultimately, US citizenship, unless they apply for asylum
and win asylum.
But, the asylum program currently
has over 400,000 unresolved applications.
Many challenges, but I'm sure they wouldn't change it
for anything.
Right?
You've spoken to some families that are happy to be here.
Correct?
Yes.
We spoke to an Afghan evacuee who
said he used to work at an American military base
in Afghanistan before the Taliban takeover.
He was brought to the US alongside his wife
and their three minor children.
They are now living in an apartment in Northern Virginia
listed by Airbnb, which has actually set up
a program to house evacuees.
They're hoping to move to a more permanent location
in the coming days.
After that, he told me that he will
seek to enroll his children in school and try to find work.
He said the children love Virginia
and they love going to the park.
But, he did express concern about the family's
legal status.
He mentioned that he hopes Congress and the US government
will provide them some certainty in the coming months.
Camilo Montoya Galvez, thank you so much
for your excellent reporting on this.
We appreciate it.